a  — u  TRANSLATION. Legend of Imulud.  No. 1.  The sea ebbed and dried up. 
 A pregnant woman came to the sea, 
 and went far off the coast. 
 A coral stone was turned upside down. 
 The sea-water was gushing out. 
 The sea-water increased, 
 and came already to the border of the village. 
 The tide was flowing and went to the forest, 
 went already to the summit of the mountain. 
 Now it flowed over all the mountains. 
 Pigs, goats, fowls and rats did not live, and all died. 
 The people had no food, and all the people died. 
 The first year passed, it did not yet dry up. 
 The second year passed. 
 The third year passed. 
 The fourth year passed, 
 and there were two men at the high places of the mountain (named) Dipigaŋən 
 and Dičakulman. 
 Two were the human beings. 
 Already the fifth year, yet no drying-up.
 And the sixth year, 
 the seventh year, 
 the eighth year, 
 already many were the kunu-shells and kara»-shells at the forest. 
 In the ninth year, 
 a rat was offered to the sea, and then the sea-water ebbed and dried up. 
 After ten years, there were already 
am-fields. 
 Ten years, eleven years, then there were already ?aro-fields. 
 The twelfth year, 
 the thirteenth year, 
 then there were already bamboo. 
 On the fourteenth year there was already the surf-breaking on the shore. 
 There were many trees in the woods. 
  The god saw the flat ground, 
 and said: “Good island of Yami! 
 He dropped a big stone on Ipaptok. 
 The stone burst, 
 and the stone gave birth to a human being. 
 The human being ate pap?ok 
 as there was no food. 
 He de- scended sea-wards. 
 A bamboo sprouted towards the sea 
 The bamboo burst and gave birth to a human being. 
 The 49  son of the stone descended to the level ground. 
 The son of the bamboo ascended weeping. 
 They both met at a miscanthus- field. 
 “%What is our name?’, said one.
 “We are ?au (human being), said another.
 They walked around. 
 The out-burster from the stone went to ḷlatai. 
 The out-burster from the bamboo went to Ivalinu. 
 The son of the bamboo stayed at Kasavilugan, 
 and took silver. 
 The son of the stone went to latai, and stayed at Tmasapau, and took iron. 
 They went already to their house at ḷkavučidan, and (the son of the stone) beat hard iron, 
 and (the son of the bamboo) beat silver 
 — soft silver. 
  Long were the penes of two, 
 and (the penis) was copulated with his knee-joint, 
 and his knee-joint swelled and itched. 
 (As for) the out-burster from the bamboo, 
 a male was born from his right knee-ioint, 
 and a female was born from his left knee-joint. 
 (As for) the out-burster from the stone, 
 a male was born from his right knee-joint, 
 and a female was born from his ḷeft knee-jŋint. 
 They brother-sister married and did coitus, and a blind child was born. 
 His wife was exchanged. 
 The wife of the son of the out-burster from the stone was married to the son of the out-burster from the pamboo. 
 The wife of the son of the out-burster from the bamboo 
 was married to the son of the out-burster from the stone. 
 They got children, growing till three generations. 
  They built boats. 
 The silver bent against tree. 
 “Let us exchange, you take silver and I take iron. 
  My ḷove is silver. 
  i have not a thing such as this iron' 
 We cut a wood, 
  We fell a big tree. 
  They did a ḷaunch ceremony. 
 The boats were already com- plete. 
 They were launched and pushed down. 
 He fixed ribs on the out-side of the boat of the out-burster of the stone. 
 He fixed ribs on the in-side of the boat of the pamboo. 
 The boat of the out-burster of the bamboo became separated. 
 Destroyed. 
 The boat of the out-burster from the stone ḷaunched, went to sea. 
 ḷt floated on the sea, 
 but was  4  .  —_—  3-‘  51  filled with bilge-water. 
 “Bad’, 
 said he. 
 He took fibres of kuḷaŋ, and the boat was stopped with the fibres of xuZa7. 
 “Good already", said he. 
 He discovered the stopper-fibres of a tree. 
  For five generations on the up-Tand ḷived those having the name fau.
 Let us descend to Iminavuit.” 
 A child was born towards the sea (i.e at Iminavuit, half of it being oZi* (a kind of dove), half of it being a human being. 
 An out-burster (-descendant) from the stone went around on the beach. 
 He saw a swine digging with its nose.
 “What, you grandfather? 
 Take and show me!”, said his grandfather. 
 A young of the swine was taken. 
 “This, grandfather, ḷ took”, said his grandchild. 
 His grandfather saw. 
 “Swine, you my grandson”,
 said his grandfather. 
 Uet us breed, we have no swine”, 
 said his grandfather. 
 They went still on the beach, and saw fow's, 
 They returned already to the house. 
 “What, eh? you my grandfather,? I saw (an animal clucking) yok-yok , said his grandson. 
 “You go! Take!T shall see, said his grandfather. 
 His grandson went and took. 
 They (he?) returned.
 “This, grandfather, I took, look! said his grandson. 
 His grandfather saw. “Tt is fowl, you my grandson, let us increase”, said his grandfather. 
 They went to Imaḷamai,
 and found goats. 
 “What, eh, T saw ?", said his grandson. 
 “Take! T shall see.” said his grandfather. 
 His grandson went and took. 
 This, grandfather, ḷTook!’, said his grandson. 
 His grandfather saw. 
 “t is a goat, you my grandson. et us increase goats, said his grandfather. 
 They had the fishing season, They took flying fish at Imaḷamai. 
  Here from Ipaptok, the place of bursting of the human being, 
 Descended to the level ground sea-wards, 
 He did the ceremony of fish-calling at ImaJamai, 
 I landed at I*akawalanan, 
 A torch was lighted and fishing was done with fire. 
  Five generations (passed). 
 They descended sea-wards. 
 A child was born at the sea-direction 
 (it was) a thin-waisted 583  human being. 
 They lived five generations, 
 they descended to Katədit+dan and to that maŋui.
 They went to a deep river i.e. to niibun. 
  A large boat of strange people over the sea landed. 
 They waded through the river.
 “We go to you”, said they (Yami). 
 “Don’t! said they.
 They song anuwud-melody and they song milawud-melody. 
  (The meaning of this song is unknown).  viou must not come, as you steal”, so shouted the strangers. Yami did not step on. 
 They went to the mountain. 
 They died because they had no food. 
 Giant millet. Similar to mangrove fruits were the ears of millet. 
 The strangers shouted, and then the ears of millet diminished. 
  Sixty were the out-bursters from the bamboo. 
 They saw huge fish. 
 They took with very long lines. 
 The big fish were to be hooked. 
 Big bamboo poles were raised. 
 They took big fish. 
 “What is this, you my grandfather?”, said he (they). 
 This is éi’at, you my grandson. “They went again for angling. 
 They fished vawuju. 
 “\What is this? you, grand- father”, said his grandson.
"This is awuju, you my grandson”, said his grandfather. 
 They again went angling (and) fished vura. 
 “What is this, you my grandson?", said his grandfather. 
 They went vet angling (and) fished alaju.
 “What is this, you my grandFather?”, said his grandson. 
 This is alaju, you my grandson”, said his grandfather. 
 The name were appointed to various trees. 
 “This is mangrove. 
 This is valinu. This is gaju. This is ŋ{čid.
[77 breath-groups are omittedT The out-burster from the bamboo went to nanumiruk (Tanumilik ?) on a wide sandy place by the sea, 
 and they increased. 
  (As for) the men bursting out of the stone, “Let us go to ḷtoŋŋa!w, said they. 
 There su7i (a kind of taro) was taken, as it was on a tree, there is origin of su
i.  (The meaning of the song is unknown).  Dead was already the father of the out-bursters from the stone at Ttoŋŋa, 
 and went to Uwaokunun. 
 They bore a child, 
 half of it being ŋawokunun (a kind of fish) 
 half of it  ETART ViRee,Tey oOvRRy  ehenaeeh —  55  being a human being. 
 A human being burst out of a tree of təwji at muwasik.
 “Let us go to them peope at Ipilatajan! , said they. 
 They bore a child and it was named Sirnagpit. 
 “Let us go to the low ḷand! 
 A child was born and it was named Sinaligig. 
 “Let us go out, let us go to Imaliwudwud. 
 “Let us go to many men at Imasik. 
 They bore a child and (it was) Siminaḷsuധvai. 
  Fell at ljakumaimuluŋ #arok. 
 tarok was taken by mer at Imasik, 
 (and then) zarok was taken by men at Ivatan. 
  Siminalsuധuvai bore four children; 
 the eldest was Simina- mawawa. 
 He bore children and the eldest was Siminamatod. 
 They (Siminamawawa and Siminamatod) fought. 
 Siminama- wawan died. 
 His fellow-lIodger(s) sang: 
  ḷ went to throw it into the sea,  Being loath to part with it,  T ḷeft it on the rock by the sea,  Tt has disapeared — happily  t was found under the tree of ḷumuḷu.  They gave uvai (reciprocally). 
 “Our mind is already good, 
 we will hold an eating-pariy, we will make a house”, they said. 
 The= house-making was complete and the eating-party was held. 
 “Let us invite our relatives, as we hold a fishing ceremony, as it is already the fishing season. Siminalsuധuvai died. 
 His sons were Siminamawawan, Siminatod, Siminapunumaniču and Siminapunumanagad. 
  A man from over-seas came and made friends with a man of Yami. 
 The foreign friend went overseas. 
 Came another foreigner, 
 a bad foreigner having a gun. 
 The Yami friend was killed by him. That bad foreigner from overseas went away.
 The over-sea friend came. 
 “Where-to my Yami friend ?,” said the foreigner. 
 “He is not as he was shot by an over-sea man_. 
 I shall go over-seas and we (T and he) will fight to the death one another”, said the over-sea friend. 
 The over- sea men fought with one another. 
  An ḷbatanese came to Imwasik, 
 and proposed a marriage to a woman (who was) ancestress of Sjapunmanagad. 
 They went beyond the sea, 
 and bore children at Ibatan. 
 Their  57  children were two. 
 They were hungry owing to want of food. 
 They heard of Siturijau in the Heaven. 
 “Wee go to Siturijau as there is plenty of food”, said he. 
 They went and went towards the horizon. 
 Then the mast was hindered and so was cut short. 
 They cut five times 
 They reached the island of Ivovos. 
 “Who is a fellow-villager of Siturijau?", 
 said the ḷbatanese. 
 “T am a fellow-villager of Siturijau”, said a man of Ivovos. 
 “We go”, said the Ibatanese. 
 “If you go, take a bundle of ḷeaves and stems of u%i. 
 If the monsterpigs eat you, give these ubi-leaves as these are their favourite (food) and they run away. 
  1. Their boat is sailing along, lightly gliding on its way, It is broken in pieces by the surges. 2. The island fell down into the sea bottom. Quiet is the deep sea.  They went to the Heaven to the Goddess (Siuriiau
. 
 They drank water of the pot of Siturijau. 
 Her child returned. 
 »We will kill you! said the child of Siturijau. 
 Don ’t! as they have drunk water of my pot”, said Siturijau. 
 They lived together. 
 One month. 
 Two months they were. 
 Three months they were. 
 Four months they were. 
 Five months they were. 
 Six months they were. 
 Seven months they were. 
 Eight months they were. 
 Nine months they were.
 One year already. 
 Two vyears. 
 Three vears. 
 Four vears. 
 Five years. 
 They went out, 
 (namely), the Bataneses and Siturijau’s grandson (went) to fields. 
 They saw goats. 
 Her grandson chased the goats. 
 A man of the Heaven of ḷkalduŋ. 
 “What do you take? said he. 
 “My goats”, said he. 
 “Don’t take because you and ḷgo to the Heaven, 
 you will see me dancing 
 Tt was already night and they already danced. 
 The dance of ḷkalduŋ was opened. 
  No rain and the plants are dried up. Tarokok in the Heaven! May put a bow! on the head!  “T will go and speak with them, then ḷet us go and see the dance at ḷkalduŋ, said the Batanese. 
 “Let us rob them!
 5Q  Let us take the fifth pot. 
 I shall be in the house. 
 You shall be at the inner door. 
 You shall be at the outer door. 
 You shall be at the space before the house. 
 You shall be at the stone steps. 
 You shall be at the space on the stone wall 
  Let us hand over from one person to another. 
Letusrun! (so ordered the Batanese to his companions) “We light a torch!” said a ḷkalduŋ man. 
 “Let us see our treasure. They stole ours. The fifth pot is missing. 
 Let us pursue them to fake it back!” 
 They were pursued by them, but the ḷbatanese were running sea-wards. 
 The men of lkalduŋ saw the sea. 
 Those who saw the sea died. 
 (As for) the people of ḷkaldun, they did not take their treasure, and “We curse them the Ibataneses”. said they (the ḷkalduŋs). 
 The sixth year (they were). 
 The seventh year (they were). 
 The eighth year (they were). 
 “If you are really (born as) a son of fortune, 
 the inner space of the warehouse shall be swept by you 
 as there is perhaps the root of our treasure”, said he (an ḷkalduŋ man). 
 °(I) you swing a huge bamboo, 
 then the treasure will appear. 
 lt shall be pulled out.” said he. 
  Now Siminavuwan pulled. 
 The portion of Siminaikaḷaŋan was torn. 
 The second portion of Siminavuwan was torn.
 The ninth year.
 “We go as T am anxious about them in the island of Yami”, (said the woman coming from Yami). 
 Siturijau heard. 
 f (they go),all of us give them food™. 
 (said Siturijau).
 “When they collect (food),
 we shall shake a fowl-hut as they do not eat (the food) over which fowls tread”. said the Batanese. 
 You dont't eat those of which middle (fowls trod on)! Those where fow
s passed are filthy. 
 You don’t eat it! 
 and do you eat?", said an Ivovos man. 
 Yes”, said the Batanese. 
 “If you eat, you may take, as it is a pity (to throw away). said the Ivovos man. 7Yeeധič said the Batanese, and all the Batanese took. 
 They took and went. 
 “We shall wait till the night comes, 
 and iake the water pot of Siturijau.” said the Batanese, 
 He (they?> went and took in the night. 
 “Wake, you my sons! as 
 it seems my water pot is taken by the Bataneses. We go and pursue and kill them rogues
”, (said Siturijau). 
 “We go to Yami as there are many various foods, said the woman of Yami. 
 They found one island. 
 “Let us land!” said he. 
 “Let us cook!”, 61  said he. 
 Then the tide covered the isTand. 
 Bad!” he said and they got on the boat. 
 They went. 
 They found one island. 
 “Let us land?’ said he.. 
 The second island was hot and at once they put themselves into the water. 
 “Let us go! said he. 
 They got into the boat. 
 “Let us go to lIand! 
 They were at lkbalat (Itbalat). 
 Many people took nanau-shell fish at the shore. 
 We will go to you”, said the people of ḷkbalat. 
 You must not come’, said the Batanese, 
 as you and we together shall not be able to row’. 
 “It does not matter, as we can (row), said he (Tkbalat-man).  They came to Yami. 
 They reached ḷktəbp. 
 <You shall do an initial fishing! said she (the woman from Yami). 
 They fished i?»k and #?ovofovo. 
 <You go to your grandfather at laTalai! said she. 
 They went to the grandfather. 
 “What is your first fishing? said he. 
 lovolovo and iḷək . said they. 
 You shall not come, you will intrude upon your uncles. said he (their grandfather). 
 Grandfather does not accept us”, said they (the children). 
 Let us go, my children! said she. 
 “Let us go to pull out sea-weeds at ḷkanjunjau.” said she. 
 The woman rowed. 
 “Where is this ?", said they. 
 “At Imavunut”, said she. 
 I recall the sandy strand”, said she. 
 In turns she yet rowed with Sinaŋgoton. 
 I recall this sandy strand”, said she. 
 “Where is this?”, said he. 
 At TkaḷaധJm. said she. 
 °T recall this sandy strand.” said she. 
 They alighted on the shore. 
 They picked up sea-weeds 
 and pusiŋ7ət. 
 All of them took ka?i¢imos. 
 The kačičimos were in one partition of their boat. 
 The sea weeds were one partition. 
 “Let us go™. 
 They went to Rakdaŋan. 
 It is of no use that we go further.
 We go to lsomarap.” 
 They went to ḷsomarap. 
 “Very hot, it is of no use, we (go) to another place. 
 We will go to lvalinu”. 
 There they resided on a large land near the sea at Ivalinu. 
 There they constructed houses. 
 They increased. 
 They constructed houses at Ivalinu. 
  From our ancestor was born Sjamanḷatunan, a horrible murderer. 
 The son of Sjapunḷatunan was Sjapunmanagat. 
 From Sjapunmanagat were born his sons Siminarivu and Sigajuŋ. 
 Two were his sons. 
 From Siminagajuŋ was born his sole son Sikiŋas. 
 From Sikiŋas were born three children. 
  _=oooə=an\‘w 5._-  The third child of Sikiŋas bore five chi’dren. 
 One of them was the grandfather of Sjapunmuaka
. 
 The second was the grand-father of Sjamanman€ato. 
 The thir-d was the grand- father of Sjamanrivu. 
 The fourth was the grandfather of Sjamandjagalit- 
 The fifth was Siminavḷəvələtən. 
 Simina- v|lsvəḷətən had no child. 
 From our grandfather was born our deceased father. 
 Two male and four females, that is; six brothers and sisters were the children of our grandfather, 
 Our deceased father gave birth to us four sons. 
 Our one brother died. 
 We three brothers live. 
 Our four sisters, of which three died and one sister ḷiives. 
 My brothers went to ḷtaiwan. 
 The storm came and they drifted by the storm and went abroad. 
 Came a Chinese-Formosan Dinsiŋ by name, 
 and told me, “Your brothers are abroad, 
 and they begot children, now the children of the elder brother are two, 
 and the chiidren of the younger brother are three. 
 .  Legend of Ilaḷalai.  A pregnant woman searched for namisiḷ-shells, 
 and went far out from the shore. 
 (When) a coral stone was turned up-side down by her, and much of the sea water came out gushing. 
 She ḷanded, 
 and run and arrived on the ḷand, 
 then, came the sea water right up to the sandy beach. 
 They took their belongings 
 and went up the mountain, 
 still the sea water increased. 
 The sea water went as far as the moun- tain. 
 They took salt. 
 They were on the mountain. 
 There was no food and so 
 salted papiok, 
 and they ate. 
 Now assembled 
 at Ipigaധun many people. 
 Now some of them died 
 as they were hungry, having no food. 
 Ten persons remained. 
 Ten years passed, the sea water ebbed. 
 They descended to the low ḷand. 
 They went to look for their houses. 
 (The houses were) destroyed by the sea. 
 They went to their own villages. 
 Some of them went to Tḷanumilik. 
 Some of them went to Ivalinu. 
 Some of them went to Imu- lud. 
 Some of them went to Iatai. 
 Some of them went to Jaju. 
 Some of them went to Ivatas. 
 Still they spIlit up, 
 and made villages. 
 The sea water ebbed anew, 
 and there  tiny Zaro. 
 They buried the taro which they found, 
 and p'anted it, 
 and they planted yams. 
 The saro increased, 
 They saw water, 
 and the stems were planted in the water. 
 The bulbs were eaten, 
 (As for) those which were planted in the water, 
 the bulbs grew. 
 The people ate to satisfaction. 
 The ancestors had no iron mattocks. 
 They took stones, 
 splitted and ground. 
 Those were the ploughing instrumen(s for the fields. 
 A litte ḷater one man went to the shore, 
  5  67  and found a float, 
 a drifting board. 
 He saw it. 
 There was much iron, 
 used by oversea people for joining boat to- gether. He took it to the village. He broke it, 
 and beat it, 
 and made an axe, 
 and a rod for digging out yams. 
 He ground it, 
 and went to cut wood in the mountain. 
 He cut poles for his house. 
 He cut a broad board, 
 and called many men, and came back. 
 He fed the helpers with a big pig and taros, 
 and he served the helpers substantially. 
 The boards were completed, 
 and so a house was built. 
 The standing poles for the house were thirty. 
 They fastened a beam, 
 and continued to build, 
 and there very many men who helped him to thatch. 
 When they had finished thatching, they took ?aros. 
 They prepared food, 
 and invited relatives. 
 Those who were invited came. 
 They wore silver helmets and sang in the evening and walked around an enclosure, 
 and saw the enclosed pigs and goats. 
 Many men were surprised(?) that there were so many beasts. 
 They finished looking at the beasts, 
 which were heaped up by the house, 
 and they distributed them; and the distribution is finished. 
 Taros, which are portions for the relatives, were put into baskets. 
 The dividing of saros into portions is finished. 
 They caught a pig, 
 and fastened it together by the legs, 
 and put through them a pole, 
 and stabbed the Pig in the throat, 
 and re- ceived its bIood in bow]s. 
 When the stabbing was finished, 
 they roasted it. 
 When the roasting was finished, 
 they scratched off the skin, 
 and dissected it. 
 When the dissec- tion was finished, they ate the raw meat and hashed 
 and arranged dishes, 
 and divided (the meat) on them. 
 When dividing was finished, they delivered the portions to the rela- tives. 
 When the distribution was finished, the relatives went home. 
 The relatives returned to their houses, 
 they rejoiced and ate and were satisfied. 
 i i i i  No. 3.  We finished the breakfast and were gathered on the boat, 
 to go to ltaiwan. We carried uncooked taros 
 as we were to pass a night 
 We beached the boat on ḷtaiwan and disembarked our cargo. 
 We loaded pebbles into the boat and rowed off the coast. 
 We stayed at AriraJau and we fished sitting on the boat.
 We caught one fish apiece. 
 Siidas and Sjamaŋmunai sprung into the sea, 
 to spear fish. 
 We turned our boat towards Makakərub and there fished. 
 Sjamanribu caught piŋpiŋun and big isuisuik. 
 We fished. 
 At noon 
 Simatapat became sea-sick. 
 We removed to the haunt of albatros far off the coast. 
 Fish did not eat bait. 
 Wee went to search for Sjamanmuŋai and others at Pukul, as it was getting dark. 
 We turned along the promontory towards the harbour. 
 We saw a grotto. 
 The fish which they caught were cut and 
 exposed to the sun. 
 They were away for spearing fish. 
 Simaḷan looked several times the surfs. 
 Let us go back not staying over the night as the sea is rough.” 
 Yes! 
 and we went to search for those who were spearing fish, 
 then appeared a small boat. As we were angling, 
 the small boat stopped 
 as the big boat still stayed. 
 They told to us 
 that they saw them ḷand, 
 as the sea was rough. 
 They went to fetch the cargo. 
 When they had fetched the cargo, 
 they rowed off, and they went with us side by side.
 We saw those who went to spear. 
 As they came 
 we threw away the pebbles, 
 and and we rowed 
 to go towards them. 
 When we arrived the harbour 
 Sjamanmuakad, Sjamanribu and Simatapat landed. 
 We pulled out our cargo from pots and nets, 
 and ḷoaded them on the boat. 
 Those who went to spear fish 
 reached to us. 
 We embarked on the boat. but we Iost sight of the small boat. 
 When we were on the sea off the coast of the e TT e. —— — —_——  T1  harbour, 
 we ate our provisions. 
 We took off the meat of two karab-shells, we ate them with our provisions. 
 Wee went on, 
 but the small boat was lost. 
 When we came far off ltaiwan, 
 we saw them. 
 Two boats came side by side at a good distance. 
 We directed the stern of the boot towards the ḷand. 
 We counted our take. 
 Three who were at the stern caught forty. 
 Simatapat did not catch fish, 
 as he suffered from a sea-sick. 
 Those who were at the bow caught seventy, 
 as there were four persons. 
 We took off scales of fish and divided among us. 
 We went home, 
 and ate supper 
 as it was getting dark. 
 We divided the fish which were speared. 
 We divided the provisions, which we brought back. 
 When it was night, we went to hear mika
ilag and mijanuanuwud and manuwud. 
 We went to sing, 
 We imitated songs of mountain. 
 And women sang dance songs. 
 We went to sleep at Sjamanrumaŋpit. 
 In the middle of the night, waked up, but it was raining, and ḷ slept again. 
 When ḷ got up, it was the dawning. 
 finished to eat a breakfast and again slept. 
 When Siŋawat came to awaken me, 
ḷ ate cold ?aros.
 I have come to the police-station, 
 and T am now being inquired about our trip to ltaiwan. 
 T will go to fetch firewood today.
 On my coming back, we will take lunch. 
 When the evening comes, 
 we will take supper. 
 When the night comes, 
 we of the same age will meet together. 
 When it dawns, we will take breakfast and go in company for outdoor working. 
  No. 4.  Two sisters of Imasik 
 walked around as far as ḷḷa’a’ai 
 They saw a stone at ḷkavatuwan.
 The 
a
i?an stone was taken by them. 
 Having arrived at ḷḷaḷalai 
 they poured water on the top of the stone. 
 “ baptize you on the crown of the head, and you shall be a man. 
 The baptism was imitated by the Yamis 
 °T point the finger at the crown of your head, and your name shall be Sitoroŋan. 
 At first his hands and next his legs grew, then his eyes opened. His nose 
 and his ears came out 
 The hairs grew. He began to speak and spoke fluently. 
 (He was) a man named Sitoroŋan. 
  No. 5.  At the time of the ancient people 
 Ibataneses came 
 and landed at lsibuwan. 
 They came to muḷud, 
 and bartered. 
 “Let us be friends!” said they. 
 "Yes.w said the Batanese. 
 The Batanese went back. 
 After two months came ḷbataneses and they ate with Yamis, 
 and bartered ornaments. 
 Yamis and the ḷbataneses ate taros and yams. 
 Bataneses came. 
 We gave them provisions of yams and taros. 
 Bataneses came. 
 There was an old Batanese. 
 He came to his friend 
 and bartered ornaments. 
 After thinking 
 “Take them! said he. 
 “T shall not be able to come again, as I am old.w 
  
