TRANSLATION. Legend of Imulud.  No. 1.  The sea ebbed and dried up. 
 A pregnant woman came to the sea, 
 and went far off the coast. 
 A coral stone was turned upside down. 
 The sea-water was gushing out. 
 The sea-water increased, 
 and came already to the border of the village. 
 The tide was flowing and went to the forest, 
 went already to the summit of the mountain. 
 Now it flowed over all the mountains. 
 Pigs, goats, fowls and rats did not live, and all died. 
 The people had no food, and all the people died. 
 The first year passed, it did not yet dry up. 
 The second year passed. 
 The third year passed. 
 The fourth year passed, 
 and there were two men at the high places of the mountain (named) Dipigaŋən 
 and Dičakulman. 
 Two were the human beings. 
 Already the fifth year, yet no drying-up.
 And the sixth year, 
 the seventh year, 
 the eighth year, 
 already many were the kunu-shells and karab-shells at the forest. 
 In the ninth year, 
 a rat was offered to the sea, and then the sea-water ebbed and dried up. 
 After ten years, there were already yam-fields. 
 Ten years, eleven years, then there were already taro-fields. 
 The twelfth year, 
 the thirteenth year, 
 then there were already bamboo. 
 On the fourteenth year there was already the surf-breaking on the shore. 
 There were many trees in the woods. 
  The god saw the flat ground, 
 and said: “Good island of Yami! 
 He dropped a big stone on Ipaptok. 
 The stone burst, 
 and the stone gave birth to a human being. 
 The human being ate paptok 
 as there was no food. 
 He de- scended sea-wards. 
 A bamboo sprouted towards the sea 
 The bamboo burst and gave birth to a human being. 
 The 49  son of the stone descended to the level ground. 
 The son of the bamboo ascended weeping. 
 They both met at a miscanthus- field. 
 “What is our name?’, said one.
 “We are tau (human being), said another.
 They walked around. 
 The out-burster from the stone went to Iḷatai. 
 The out-burster from the bamboo went to Ivalinu. 
 The son of the bamboo stayed at Kasavilugan, 
 and took silver. 
 The son of the stone went to Iḷatai, and stayed at Imasapau, and took iron. 
 They went already to their house at Ikavučidan, and (the son of the stone) beat hard iron, 
 and (the son of the bamboo) beat silver 
 — soft silver. 
  Long were the penes of two, 
 and (the penis) was copulated with his knee-joint, 
 and his knee-joint swelled and itched. 
 (As for) the out-burster from the bamboo, 
 a male was born from his right knee-joint, 
 and a female was born from his left knee-joint. 
 (As for) the out-burster from the stone, 
 a male was born from his right knee-joint, 
 and a female was born from his left knee-joint. 
 They brother-sister married and did coitus, and a blind child was born. 
 His wife was exchanged. 
 The wife of the son of the out-burster from the stone was married to the son of the out-burster from the bamboo. 